# Oxidative phosphorylation is a key feature of neonatal monocyte immunometabolism promoting myeloid differentiation after birth

Neonates primarily rely on innate immune defense, yet their inflammatory responses are usually restricted compared to adults. This is controversially interpreted as a sign of immaturity or essential programming, increasing or decreasing the risk of sepsis, respectively.  Here, combined transcriptomic, metabolic, and immunological studies in monocytes of healthy individuals revealed an inverse ontogenetic shift in metabolic pathway activities with increasing age. Neonatal monocytes were characterized by enhanced oxidative phosphorylation supporting ongoing myeloid differentiation. This phenotype was gradually replaced during early childhood by increasing glycolytic activity fueling the inflammatory responsiveness. Microbial stimulation shifted neonatal monocytes to an adult-like metabolism, whereas ketogenic diet in adults mimicking neonatal ketosis could not revive a neonate-like metabolism.  Our findings disclose hallmarks of innate immunometabolism during healthy postnatal immune adaptation and suggest that premature activation of glycolysis in neonates might increase their risk of sepsis by impairing myeloid differentiation and promoting hyperinflammation.

In this repository, you can find the code and data needed to reproduce the analysis of the RNA-sequencing data presented in the publication "Oxidative phosphorylation is a key feature of neonatal monocyte immunometabolism promoting myeloid differentiation after birth" by Ehlers, Tödtmann, and Holsten et al., 2024.
